---
layout: post
title: Game Idea
description: "A brief discussion of the game I plan on building."
modified: 2014-08-20
tags: [game development]
image:
  feature: left-4-dead-2.jpg
  credit: unknown author
  creditlink:  http://www.videogamesblogger.com/2009/09/27/left-4-dead-2-wallpaper.htm
---

## Codename _Slappy_

So, I'm terrible at naming things, but I need to give this game idea a name
so that I can refer to it in future blog posts. _Slappy_ is a top-down 2D
game that tries to emulate all of the things that I loved about the [Left 4
Dead](http://store.steampowered.com/app/550/) series.

### Another Zombie Game

The hope is that this is not another zombie game, but I have not figured out
what to replace the brain-dead zombies with. Each level will be self
contained and will require the player to navigate the unsafe world until
they find the "goal." In Left 4 Dead (L4D) this was a safe house and
reaching the safe house triggered the next level in addition to some details
about your performance on the current level.  

### Procedural Generation

I plan on relying on procedural generation in several parts of the gameplay
experience. The first and most obvious, is procedurally generated levels.
The plan for each level is for it to last between five and ten minutes so
that you can get in, knock out a level, and continue on with your day.  

As part of the level generation, I will also be implementing a forest
generation algorithm that will provide cover / hiding areas for enemy.
Things within the forest cannot be seen until you enter the forest and even
then you have only a limited range of sight. One fun challenge for level
generation is developing the two algorithms so that they complement each
other and provide a cohesive experience .

The last area where I can currently envision procedural generation is in the
actual player experience. The L4D series ships with an AI Director which is
responsible for creating enjoyable experiences for the player. The AI
Director is designed to take into account the player's abilities, current
performance, position, mood, and tension to decide how many enemies to
spawn, where to spawn them, etc. I plan on developing something similar
because the AI of L4D has intrigued me for a very long time.

### Other Details

The game will be developed in Java with the [libGDX](http://libgdx.com)
library and will be available on all major platforms (iOS, Android, Mac,
Windows). This blog will host all of the major updates to the game until I
decide on an actual name for the project and purchase the domain for it.  
